---
title             : "General Discussion and Conclusion"
shorttitle        : "General Discussion"

author: 
  - name          : "Brian V. Rusk"
    affiliation   : "1"
    corresponding : yes    # Define only one corresponding author
    address       : "Department of Linguistics 3-27 Assiniboia Hall"
    email         : "brusk@ualberta.ca"
    role:         # Contributorship roles (e.g., CRediT, https://casrai.org/credit/)
      - Conceptualization
      - Writing - Original Draft Preparation
      - Writing - Review & Editing

affiliation:
  - id            : "1"
    institution   : "University of Alberta"
  

authornote: |
  

abstract: |
  
  <!-- https://tinyurl.com/ybremelq -->
  
keywords          : "keywords"
wordcount         : "X"

bibliography      : ["/Volumes/GoogleDrive/My Drive/Linguistics/bibtex/Dissert_manual_update.bib"]

floatsintext      : no
figurelist        : no
tablelist         : no
footnotelist      : no
linenumbers       : yes
mask              : no
draft             : no

csl               : "/Volumes/GoogleDrive/My Drive/Linguistics/Research Projects/PhD_GP/DissertationPhD/DissertationText/apa6csl_no_initial.csl"
documentclass     : "apa6"
classoption       : "man"
output            : papaja::apa6_docx
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
library("papaja")
library(tidyverse)
library(lme4)
library(lazyeval)
library(stargazer)
library(gridExtra)
library(stringr)
library(ggthemes)
library(readxl)
library(rebus)
library(xtable)
library(lubridate)
library(lmerTest)
library(effsize)
library(numform)

apaFormTab <- function(x, dec = 3, format = "pval") {
	if(format == "pval") {
		y <- x
		y <- round(x, dec)
		y <- ifelse(x < 0.001, "<.001", ifelse(x >= 1, "1", str_sub(y, 2, 5)))
		return(y)
	} else {
		exp <- paste("%.", dec, "f", sep = "") # Includes the final digit
		y <- str_sub(sprintf(exp, x), 2, dec + 3) # + 3. Includes the leading 0. and digit
		# y <- sprintf(exp, x)
		return(y)
	}
	
}

source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/Selector.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/ageFormat.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/tableCell.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/numbers2words.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/effAdder.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/f_pval_st.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/t_paster.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/Corstars.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/R_functions/desc_testAPA.R')
source('~/Dropbox/db documents/HomeR Practice/extract_anova.R')

r_refs("/Volumes/GoogleDrive/My Drive/Linguistics/bibtex/Dissert_manual_update.bib")
load("Conclusion_rmd.RData")
```

```{r analysis-preferences}
# Seed for random number generation
set.seed(42)
knitr::opts_chunk$set(cache.extra = knitr::rand_seed)
```

# Summary of Results

The overarching purpose of this dissertation was to examine how the immersion context impacts L2 acquisition. The research presented in Chapters Two, Three, and Four addresses this by examining how the L2-English abilities of the adolescent immersion participants are similar or different from the English abilities of community-L2 learners and/or L1-English speakers; how the out-of-school language environments of these immersion learners compare to their community-L2 learning peers; and ways in which these differences in L2 learning environment may be associated with identified differences in L2 abilities. In this chapter, the results of these studies are summarized. Then, the implications of these results are discussed with regard to their contribution to understanding of how the immersion learning context impacts L2 acquisition. Finally, possible future directions for research with immersion learners are proposed. 

## Study 1

<!-- Mention @Kowal1997 and others about immersion L2 production -->

The goal of the first study reported in Chapter Two was to compare the receptive morphosyntactic ability of immersion learners to both community-L2 learners and L1 speakers of the target language. Previous research with immersion learners has shown that their L2 production is often non-target (*i.e.*, they make errors) when compared to an L1 standard of morphosyntactic proficiency. However, the degree to which these differences in L2 ability can be ascribed to the immersion context or to L2 acquisition more generally is unclear, given that immersion learners have never been compared directly to another group of high-proficiency early L2 learners. To compare the receptive morphosyntactic ability of the three study groups, a grammaticality judgment task was used. Stimuli examined a range of grammatical morphemes that varied in level of difficulty. In addition, learner factors which have been found to be predictive of L2 morphosyntactic ability at earlier stages of acquisition for community-L2 learners [*e.g.*, @Jia2007; @Paradis2020soto; @Paradis2011g] were examined in order to identify factors that may be associated with L2 development in each of the two L2 learning contexts. 

The results of the judgment task showed differences in accuracy between all three groups. Both L2 groups had lower accuracy than the L1-English group for stimuli classified as either easier (Easy) or more difficult (Difficult). For the participants of the community-L2 group this indicates that even after more than eight years of L2-English exposure in their schools and community, their receptive morphosyntactic ability does not exactly mirror their L1-speaking peers. The L1-English group had very high accuracy for the Easy stimuli. Despite being less accurate than the L1 participants, the community-L2 participants were significantly more accurate than the immersion group for stimuli classified as Easy, with the gap in accuracy between the community-L2 participants and the L1 speakers being much smaller than that between the community-L2 and immersion participants. The immersion participants' accuracy was low overall, while the accuracy of community-L2 participants was only particularly low for the Difficult stimuli, for which the two L2 groups were not significantly different from each other. Nevertheless, it was not only the L2 groups that found the Difficult stimuli challenging as the L1-English group also had lower accuracy for these stimuli.

Examination of factors that predicted individual differences in judgment-task accuracy showed that both learner-internal and learner-external factors had an impact. However, these factors predicted very little of the within-group variance in L2 ability, indicating that the examined factors were not powerful explanations of individual differences for these later-stage high-proficiency L2 learners. Further, for neither group was longer L2 exposure a predictor of morphosyntactic ability, suggesting that L2 morphosyntactic ability has slowed or plateaued by this point in development.

## Study 2
<!-- Somewhere in here mention @Lew-W2017, and other plural-singular research - add to the first paragraph -->

Findings from the judgment task indicate that early L2 learners in immersion differ in their morphosyntactic ability even after many years of L2 exposure. However, how these differences in morphosyntactic ability may or may not impact L2 comprehension remains unclear. The study presented in Chapter Three assessed comprehension of English plural-singular marking, a semantically transparent and frequently used morphological distinction. This construction differs from Mandarin and has been noted as an area of difficulty in L2 acquisition for L1-speakers of classifier languages like Mandarin [@Jiang2007; @Luk2009]. Comprehension was assessed online, with a visual-world eye-tracking task, and offline, with a picture-decision task. Immersion participants were compared to a group of L1-English speakers. 

For the picture-decision task, the accuracy of the immersion participants was lower at 69% accurate compared to the L1-English controls who were 92% accurate. Receptive vocabulary was also examined as a predictor of accuracy. While a larger L2 vocabulary size was a significant predictor of higher response accuracy for the immersion learners, their responses were still significantly less accurate after taking vocabulary size into account. In sum, the immersion participants were less able to use the bound plural '*-s*' morphological marker or its absence to disambiguate between pictures of either single or multiple items.

For the eye-tracking task, the immersion group's looks to the target images had both similarities and differences with the L1-English control group. For plural stimulus trials (*i.e.*, when a plural noun in the auditory stimulus was paired with a target image of multiple corresponding items), the immersion participants were as likely as the L1-English speakers to be looking at the target image. However, for singular stimulus trials, the immersion participants were less likely to be looking at the target image. Despite the immersion participants being more likely to parallel the L1-speakers for the plural trials, this did not translate into an accuracy advantage on the picture-decision task for plural stimulus items and was likely the result of an early bias exhibited by both groups to look at the pictures with multiple items. However, it remains possible that a greater proportion of looks to targets on plural trials reflects superior online comprehension that does not carry over to the explicit picture-decision task.

Together, findings from the two tasks indicate that these immersion learners do not interpret English plural-singular marking identically to L1-English speakers, even after many years of L2 exposure. However, it remains unclear why these differences should exist for a semantically transparent, highly frequent morphosyntactic construction, particularly given that plural-singular marking is early acquired in L1-English acquisition. This study shows that comprehension tasks targeting specific morphosyntactic constructions can reveal differences in comprehension that may not be apparent on tasks of holistic L2 comprehension.

## Study 3
<!-- Make connections to immersion literature that talks about the balance of input and output - Immersion out-of-school has the same problems as in-school. -->

The final study, reported in Chapter Four, examined how the out-of-school L2 environments of immersion and community-L2 learners differ, and what implications these differences potentially have for the development of L2 ability. In order to collect comparison data for participants' out-of-school L2 experiences, a language background questionnaire was used. In addition, the groups were compared for L2-English receptive vocabulary, assessed using the PPVT. Finally, these differences in out-of-school L2 experiences and length of L2 exposure were modelled to see if they predicted receptive vocabulary development. Results suggest that the two participant groups differ in the richness of their out-of-school L2 environment and that this has implications for their L2 receptive vocabulary knowledge.

Sources of out-of-school L2 experience were categorized depending on whether they were mainly sources of L2 input, additional to what the learners of each group would receive in school, or whether they were more balanced in opportunities for both L2 input and L2 output. This was key given that research shows immersion learners' in-school L2 experience is predominantly L2 input with few opportunities to produce L2 output [@Swain1988; @Allen1990]. These categories were labelled as L2 input and interactional L2 use, respectively. 

Though it has been considered typical of immersion contexts that learners' L2 experiences are limited to the classroom [@Swain1997], findings for the study presented in Chapter Four indicate that the immersion participants have access that is comparable to the community-L2 learners for sources of L2 input from reading, social media, and traditional media such as television, video, and music. However, large differences between the groups were found in their access to sources of L2 interactional use with peers, at home, or via text messaging. Though the findings of the study indicated that the immersion participants had richer exposure to out-of-school L2 input than previously recognized, the differences in opportunities for interactional L2 use indicate that overall, the L2 environment for the immersion participants was less rich than that of the community-L2 participants. Like findings for in-class L2 exposure, the out-of-school L2 experience of immersion learners is also predominantly input as opposed to opportunities for interactional L2 use.

Comparison of the two groups for L2 receptive vocabulary indicated a large difference between the groups. The community-L2 participants had a group mean score just above the age-standardized receptive vocabulary score for monolingual English speakers with most scores within the normal range. In contrast, the immersion group had a mean score outside the normal monolingual range. These findings indicate that the community-L2 participants have caught up to the monolingual norm, but that the immersion learners still lag. 

For both groups, L2 receptive vocabulary size was predicted by richer L2 input and richer interactional L2 use, though the models included mostly different predictors across groups. For the community-L2 participants, using English for reading, interacting with peers, and messaging all predicted larger vocabulary sizes. For the immersion participants, messaging in English and longer exposure to English both predicted a larger receptive vocabulary. In contrast to the models predicting morphosyntactic accuracy reported in Chapter Two, much more of the within-group variance was explained by the models for receptive vocabulary. 

<!-- This indicates the importance of a rich L2 environment in the development of L2 ability.  -->

# General Discussion
    
<!-- ## Context and Developing L2 Abilities -->

<!-- I've summarized/amalgamated key findings. Abilities; Context -->

The key motivation for this dissertation was to investigate how the immersion context impacts L2 acquisition. The findings of this dissertation show that these adolescent immersion learners have non-target ability with L2 grammatical morphemes and smaller L2 receptive vocabulary sizes, despite their more than eight years of immersion. This aligns with the conclusions of previous studies of immersion learners showing that when compared to a target language standard based on L1 speakers, immersion learners often have non-target use of morphosyntactic constructions [@Fortune2015a; @Kowal1997; @Wesche1993] and smaller vocabularies [@Hermanto2012; @Harley1992] even after many years of exposure. 

Though the findings presented here are consistent with previous research, the present dissertation makes three key contributions to understudied areas in immersion. First, though immersion learners have been compared against target language standards based on L1 speakers, they have not been compared to L2-learning peers in community-L2 contexts. With increasing acknowledgement that bilinguals should not be expected to precisely mirror the linguistic ability of (two) monolinguals [@Grosjean2008], the degree to which the non-target ability of immersion learners is due to L2 learning in general or to the immersion context is unclear. Second, little is known specifically about the L2-English ability that L1-Mandarin learners develop in immersion. Prior conclusions about the L2 abilities of early immersion learners are based on other L1-L2 pairings, which are often more closely related European languages. Third, research on immersion learners' morphosyntactic ability has tended to focus on non-target L2 production, often concluding that learners' L2 receptive abilities are more target-like. However, receptive abilities are typically assessed using global listening and reading comprehension measures [*e.g.*, @Genesee1981; @Turnbull1998;  @Harley1997; @Swain1982lapkin] while production tends to be scrutinized using detailed error analysis [*e.g.*, @Bild1989; @Turnbull1998; @Harley1997; @Harley1987]. Collectively, the individual studies of the present dissertation provide evidence that L2 learning context has an impact on target language abilities beyond what should be expected to result from the process of learning a second language more generally, and that there are clear differences in receptive ability. 

In this final chapter, the findings of the present dissertation are discussed with the aim of understanding how L1-Mandarin learners acquire L2-English in immersion. This chapter addresses factors that impact the immersion learners' L2 attainment, and how and why non-target ability emerges, persists, and ultimately whether it may be altered. These topics are discussed in relation to findings for the other dissertation participant groups and research for both immersion and community-L2 learners. Findings are also interpreted through research and theory within the usage-based paradigm. It is concluded that L2 learning context is ultimately a reflection of a community of interlocutors, and this, in turn, is the key factor in determining L2 ability. 

<!-- You are going to talk about reasons why context is everything, concluding that it erases sources of IDs, determines what is acquired 
 - immersion unlocks powerful forces of acquisition 
 - eventually immersion learners speak like each other 
     - because the main driver is convergence on each other other IDFs are washed away. 
     - FFI will succeed or fail based on the degree to which it tries to swim against this. -->

## Predictors of Differences in L2 Ability 

Though the dissertation expressly investigated the impact of L2 learning context, context was conceived of as a macro-variable that indexed a range of more proximal micro-variables impacting L2 development more directly. As a result, L2 context is deconstructed into a set of learner-external factors that are potential sources of individual differences in L2 ability. These are analyzed to understand the elements of an L2 environment that drive the development of L2 abilities. In order to focus on L2 context, the L2 participant groups were matched for L1, age at testing, age of beginning English education, and parental education. Thus, the expectation was that differences in L2 ability should be the result of differences in the L2 environment provided by each L2 learning context. In addition to these learner-external factors, in Chapter Two, some learner-internal factors were also examined for their potential impact on L2 morphosyntactic ability.

For L2 receptive vocabulary, only learner-external factors associated with L2 learning context were examined. For the community-L2 participants, larger L2 vocabulary sizes were predicted by greater amounts of L2 input through reading. In addition, both more L2 use with peers and for messaging were associated with larger L2 vocabulary sizes. The model for the community-L2 group had an adjusted $R^2$  `r f_num(rq2_cl2$adj.r.squared, digits = 2)` indicating that these factors explained a large proportion of variance in L2 receptive vocabulary knowledge among the participants of this group. For the immersion learners, only two variables predicted a larger vocabulary size. Of these, the most predictive variable of a larger L2 vocabulary was more L2 use for messaging. This was also the only significant variable that was a source of out-of-school L2 exposure, as the other variable, length of L2 exposure, was defined as the length of time the participant had been in English immersion. In addition, the model for the immersion learners had an adjusted $R^2$ of only `r f_num(rq2_il2$adj.r.squared, digits = 2)`, indicating that the model explained less variance for the immersion learners. These results indicate that a richer L2 environment can benefit learners in either context, but that out-of-school L2 experiences are more likely to benefit community-L2 learners, while immersion learners still rely on in-school exposure.

In contrast to the models for receptive vocabulary, very little variance between individual participants was explained by the models for morphosyntactic ability reported in Chapter Two. For the model predicting immersion learners' accuracy on the judgment task, the adjusted $R^2$ was `r apaFormTab(RQ2_Imm_rsq_out[1,1], 2, format = "cor")` as opposed to `r f_num(rq2_il2$adj.r.squared, digits = 2)` for receptive vocabulary. For the community-L2 group, the morphosyntax model adjusted $R^2$ was `r apaFormTab(RQ2_Com_rsq_out_c[1,1], 2, format = "cor")` (with the stimulus difficulty variable removed), in contrast to `r f_num(rq2_cl2$adj.r.squared, digits = 2)` for receptive vocabulary. Given that the respective $R^2$ values across domains are based on different types of models that analyze the results of different test instruments (*i.e.*, either the PPVT or the judgment task), and that somewhat different sets of predictors were included in each study, these numbers cannot be directly compared. Nevertheless, the differences in estimated explained variance are very large. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude, in general terms, that much more of the within-group variance in receptive vocabulary was explained by learner factors, whereas little variation in morphosyntactic ability was explained. 

Thus, findings indicate that for participants of both of these high-proficiency adolescent L2 groups, differences between individual learners, particularly in their L2 environment, have a larger impact on L2 receptive vocabulary than on L2 morphosyntactic ability. At first glance, this could be interpreted as inconsistent with a usage-based approach given that these approaches propose common underlying representations for all types of linguistic constructions [@Kidd2018donnelly; @Dabrowska2018], and thus, both vocabulary and morphosyntax should be similarly impacted by learner factors. As a result, the findings presented here could be interpreted as support for theoretical approaches to language that posit a split between lexical knowledge and rule-based morphosyntactic knowledge [*e.g.*, @Pinker1999; @Ullman2005]. However, it was argued in Chapter Two that development of L2 morphosyntactic ability for the studied constructions is likely to have plateaued for learners in both L2 groups. When examining factors that predict L2 development, there needs to be L2 development still taking place to predict. Thus, the difference in predictive power between the two types of models may not be the result of differences in linguistic domains, but the respective developmental stages of each L2 domain.

## Continued L2 Development in Immersion

<!-- Also maybe I should break this down more. I want a section, maybe ask? Are they progressing toward L1-like knowledge, then answer my question. Take the question apart and ask what the answer requires. Start with theory. Then point out that plateauing seems to be an issue in immersion. -->

<!-- I need to explain why on one hand we could simply say that the immersion learners need more time, but that this would be a complete misunderstanding of what the immersion learners know. Thus, we have to understand where they are in relation to L1 speakers. -->

The results of the present dissertation indicate that after many years of L2 exposure both the morphosyntactic and receptive vocabulary abilities of the studied immersion learners can remain different, not only from L1 speakers, but community-L2 peers, as well. Overall, results indicate that the L2-English abilities of the community-L2 learners are more convergent with L1 speakers than are the L2 abilities of the immersion learners. However, one background variable for which the two L2 groups were not matched was in their length of English exposure. The immersion participants had approximately eight and a half years of exposure whereas the community-L2 participants had about ten years. When compared directly, there was a significant difference between the groups (`r t_testLoE` based on the participants of Chapter Four). In addition, results presented in Chapter Four indicate that the community-L2 participants also use their L2 more often within this length of time. Both factors mean that the community-L2 participants have a sizable advantage in their total quantity of L2 exposure. Therefore, it is reasonable to ask whether the L2 development of the two L2 groups is similar, with the immersion learners on a more delayed timeline reflecting their lower quantity of total L2 exposure, or whether the evidence presented here indicates qualitative differences in L2 development between the two groups. The answer to this largely depends on the domain of language examined.

### L2 Receptive Vocabulary Ability

<!-- In order to interpret the study results presented in this dissertation, it is necessary to assess where the immersion learners are in their L2 development. The participants of the two L2 groups were matched for their ages of beginning their English education, age at testing, and L1.  -->

For receptive vocabulary, the immersion participants continued to lag well behind the community-L2 group, as well as the monolingual-normed standard score for the PPVT. The two groups also differed from one another in that length of L2 exposure was a significant predictor of L2 receptive vocabulary for the immersion learners but not for the community-L2 learners. However, L2 receptive vocabulary knowledge was gauged using an age-standardized PPVT score, meaning that participants' vocabulary scores were not a reflection of an absolute number of words known, but rather a measure of how the participants compared to same-aged monolingual English speakers. Language exposure over time is a powerful predictor of vocabulary development throughout an individual's lifetime even for an L1 [@Keuleers2015], and this is reflected in PPVT standard scores which increase with age. Thus, for monolingual English speakers (or community-L2 participants) to match the standard score, vocabulary development has to continue year after year.  

plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism plagiarism

As a result, measurement against the PPVT standard score indicates that the L2 receptive vocabulary knowledge of participants in both L2 groups is still developing. The additional impact of more years of L2 exposure for the immersion participants reflects that with each year of immersion, they are getting closer to the standardized score for monolinguals (*i.e.*, they are catching up). In this light, the lack of impact for the community-L2 participants makes sense given that, on average, their receptive vocabulary scores fall within the normal range for English monolinguals, indicating that they have already caught up. No additional impact of years of L2 exposure implies that the community-L2 participants, as a group, match the year-over-year receptive vocabulary development of their L1-English-speaking peers, neither falling behind nor pulling ahead. Thus, the evidence gathered and presented in this dissertation indicates that it is reasonable to anticipate that immersion learners with longer L2 exposure and a richer L2 environment could potentially close the gap in receptive vocabulary ability, though it is not clear that this would happen in practice (*i.e.*, before immersion learners' programs end at high-school graduation). As a result, it can be concluded that the difference in quantity of L2 exposure is an important explanation for the lag in the immersion learners' L2 receptive vocabulary knowledge, and that the receptive vocabulary development of both L2 groups is ongoing.

<!-- re-read paragraph above and begin below - you're transitioning from vocabulary to morphosyntax - you probably do want to make the case that you are judging vocabulary ability at an 'age-appropriate' level, whereas, morphosyntax is more basic (be careful here - you did not compare monolinguals and L2s directly on PPVT. L1 participants may be significantly better than community-L2s... but it should be safe to say that L1-speaking 13-year-olds have adult-like morphosyntax.) -->

### L2 Morphosyntactic Ability

Findings for L2 morphosyntactic ability had both similarities and differences with findings for L2 receptive vocabulary. On the judgment task, the immersion participants had lower accuracy than the community-L2 participants for Easy stimuli. However, there was no significant difference between these L2 groups for the Difficult stimuli. While the community-L2 participants were still significantly below the L1-English control group for Easy stimuli, their accuracy was nonetheless much closer to the control group than they were to the immersion group. This indicates that the community-L2 participants had already developed a considerable amount of English morphosyntactic ability, but that the immersion participants, if considered to be on a journey toward L1-like ability, still had a long way to go. 

The Easy stimuli for the judgment task probed ability to detect errors with articles, past tense, and plural marking. In L1 acquisition, these grammatical morphemes begin to be mastered in preschool, with articles reaching appropriate use around four years of age [@Maratsos1974; @Emslie1981], with both past-tense and plural showing consistent productive use around the same time, but with errors of omission lasting to around seven years of age [@Berko1958; @Graves1971; @Matthews2006; @Marchman1997]. Though these grammatical morphemes are mastered fairly early on in L1 acquisition, the immersion learners still appeared to find the Easy stimuli challenging. At the same time, the community-L2s were largely accurate with these items despite still being significantly different from the L1-controls. 

Like for L2 receptive vocabulary, it could be that the difference between the immersion and the community-L2 groups on the judgment task is the result of the community-L2 group's additional quantity of L2 exposure. However, there are several reasons that indicate a continued developmental trajectory toward L1-like ability is unlikely for the immersion learners. First, previous research has found that immersion learners' morphosyntactic abilities may plateau in a non-L1-like state [@Hart1991; @Fortune2015a], and that this is more likely for constructions that contrast from L1 to L2 [*e.g.*, incorrect use of grammatical gender in L2-French immersion by L1-English speakers\; @Warden1997]. In addition, longitudinal research for community-L2 learners with a Chinese or other isolating L1 indicates that development of grammatical morphology progresses more rapidly in the first few years and then begins to slow [@Jia2007; @Paradis2016a; @Blom2012], with other research indicating that this pattern is likely shared by child L2 learners across L1s [@Soto-Corominas2020]. Thus, the substantial difference in morphosyntactic ability between the two L2 groups is likely to have emerged in the first few years of L2 exposure rather than in the one and half year gap between the groups from eight and a half to ten years of L2 exposure. Thus, it should be expected that, for both L2 groups, much of their L2 learning for these grammatical morphemes has already taken place prior to reaching middle school. 

Finally, longer exposure to English did not predict higher accuracy on the judgment task for either L2 group. For the immersion participants, the one standard deviation range for length of English exposure was a window of over two years, meaning that, there was no evidence the immersion participants' L2 morphosyntactic ability was becoming more target-like over this span of time. In contrast to L2 receptive vocabulary, the evidence gathered here indicates that the morphosyntactic ability of the immersion learners appears to have plateaued at a stage different from either the ability of L1 speakers or that of their community-L2 peers.

## Emergence of Non-target L2 Morphosyntax in Immersion

It is argued above that the immersion learners' ability with the L2 morphosyntactic constructions examined in this dissertation is no longer converging on an ability that parallels L1-English speakers. This section and the section following include discussions of potential explanations for why the immersion learners' L2 abilities differ from both L1-speaking and community-L2 peers. Specifically, this section discusses how the immersion learners' non-target L2 abilities with English grammatical morphology arise, and the next section discusses why these abilities persist.

For immersion learners, @Harley1993 noted that even highly frequent L2 constructions could be vulnerable to non-target use if they lacked perceptual salience, did not carry a heavy communicative load, or differed from the L1. These risk factors for non-target acquisition are associated with either prior linguistic knowledge or perceptual mechanisms, and are therefore compatible with usage-based approaches which see linguistic knowledge as an emergent result of language experience and domain-general cognitive mechanisms [@Beckner2009]. Though L2 acquisition involves the combination of linguistic experience and cognitive mechanisms, in actuality, these are inseparable as they exert reciprocal influences on each other [@Ellis2006c]. In both L1 and L2 learning, language experience shapes cognitive learning mechanisms, and these mechanisms shape what is perceived and attended to from subsequent language experience [@Beckner2009; @Ellis2008NC]. This means that L2 learners begin their new language with cognitive mechanisms optimized for their L1 and entrenched implicit expectations about how language functions based on their L1 language experience, both of which shape learning of the L2 [@Wulff2018].

For morphosyntactic ability, the present dissertation examined L2 receptive ability with English grammatical morphemes, including articles, past tense, plural-singular, and verb agreement forms for [be]{.smallcaps}, [do]{.smallcaps}, and for third person. None of these constructions has a close correlate in Mandarin. For definiteness, Mandarin uses word order and not articles. For the constructions marking tense, obligatory number, or verb agreement, Mandarin has neither bound morphemes nor does it mark these functions. This means that these constructions can either differ across languages in just form, or in both form and function. As a result, L1-Mandarin English learners are unlikely to attend to these grammatical morphemes, and nor will they anticipate their functions where they are also absent from Mandarin. Thus, there is little directly transferable L1-Mandarin knowledge to benefit learning these grammatical morphemes in L2-English. In addition to L1-tuned perception of the L2, the difficultly of acquiring grammatical morphemes is compounded as these constructions often have low phonological salience [@Ellis2008NC]. Low phonological salience has been found to negatively impact ease of grammatical morpheme acquisition for L2 acquisition in general, regardless of L1 [@Goldschneider2005].

How prior learning and construction salience impact the early stages of L2 learning was investigated in a series of studies by Ellis and colleagues [@Cintron-V2015; @Ellis2010sagarra; @Ellis2011sagarra; @Sagarra2013ellis; @Ellis2014hafeez]. Prior learning was investigated as the impact of pretraining in the L2 (short-term prior learning) and/or properties of the participants' L1 (long-term prior learning). These studies with adults examined either L2 Spanish, or a miniature language based on Latin, investigating whether participants showed a preference for determining temporal reference using either adverbs, such as the translation equivalents of *yesterday*, *today* or *tomorrow*, or a preference for verb forms marked for tense. The studies showed that both properties of the prior-learned L1 and pretraining in the L2 play a role in determining the L2 cues to which learners attend. Specifically, they showed that attention to either an adverb or verb form when both were present in a stimulus was determined by three factors. The first was whether a participant's L1 had rich verbal morphology, poor verbal morphology, or no verbal morphology. Essentially, L1 speakers of Spanish and Russian were more likely to attend to verb morphology than English L1s given that both Spanish and Russian have richer morphology than English. Speakers of all three of these languages were more likely to attend to verb morphology than were L1 speakers of Chinese, which lacks bound verb morphology entirely. 

The second determining factor was whether participants had received pretraining with either the relevant adverbs or verb forms. This impacted participants in all L1 groups showing that pretraining could, to an extent, mitigate L1 knowledge. This means that an L1 speaker of Chinese who received pretraining on verb morphology would be more likely to attend to these constructions than a Chinese speaker who had not, though both would still be more likely to attend to adverbs. 

The final determining factor was that all participants had a tendency to attend to the more phonologically salient adverbs, particularly, as the complexity of the stimuli increased. The tendency to prefer lexical markers of tense to morphosyntactic markers is typical of adult L2 learners regardless of L1 [@Shirai2009ta], and is not limited only to tense as a preference for lexical over grammatical markers appears to be a general principle of L2 learning [@Klein1992perdue].

These studies indicate that in the earlier stages of L2 learning, L1 knowledge has an important impact on processing the new language [@Sagarra2013ellis], meaning that subsequent L2 experience is parsed through perceptual mechanism tuned by L1 experience. As a result, and consistent with the studies discussed above, grammatical morphemes are unlikely to be preferred initial cues for the immersion learners. In the present dissertation, the most closely examined grammatical morpheme was comprehension of English plural-singular marking. Because there is no directly transferable construction in Mandarin, the immersion learners need to inductively learn how English plural-singular marking with '*-s*' works from their L2 experiences within the immersion context. For L2 comprehension of plural-singular marking, it should be expected that the immersion participants are biased toward attending to lexical indicators of quantification both because these have closer equivalent constructions across the two languages, and because they are more phonologically salient. Specifically, Mandarin speakers should be more likely to attend to English lexical markers of number such as cardinal numbers, or the determiners *this/that* and *these/those*. This potential initial reliance on number information supplied by preceding quantifiers can also attenuate subsequent learning of additional cues. This phenomenon is referred to as *blocking* where only a prior-learned cue is associated with a particular outcome and thus, only the initially learned cue is reinforced through subsequent exposure [@Kruschke2000blair]. Thus, not only should Mandarin speakers acquire lexically marked quantifiers more rapidly, attention to these markers can actually slow or prevent learning redundant cues, particularly those that are less salient and inconsistent with the L1.

In principle, there is nothing inherent to the immersion context that prevents immersion learners from attending to noun quantification. L1-English learners in Spanish immersion have been shown to use number-marked determiners to identify referents on an online task before completing their second year of immersion [@Lew-W2017]. This indicates that when the construction is phonologically salient and consistent with the L1, immersion learners can demonstrate rapid acquisition. It is expected that English grammatical morphemes, and plural-singular marking specifically, should be frequently modelled in the L2 input immersion teachers provide for their students. However, in line with Harley's (1993) risk factors, when grammatical morphemes are less phonologically salient, have their meaning overshadowed by other semantic cues, or are not present in the L1, they may be subject to non-target acquisition. Overall, the research discussed in this section serves to illustrate how L1-Mandarin immersion learners may not be able to attend to English grammatical morphemes in a way that facilitates acquiring ability to use them as L1 speakers do.

<!-- The participants of the two L2 groups were matched for their ages of beginning their English education, age at testing, parental education, and L1. -->

## The Persistence of Non-target L2 Morphosyntax in Immersion

The research discussed in the previous section helps explain why these immersion learners' ability with L2 grammatical morphemes can be non-target at early stages. These explanations are rooted in perceptual mechanisms that are either influenced by L1 knowledge, or, like the impact of low phonological salience, are expected to be common to all L2 learners. Given that the participants of both L2 groups are L1-Mandarin speakers who began L2-English at similar ages, these explanations do not account for why the immersion participants' ability appears to have plateaued in a state different from the community-L2 learners. Thus, their differences in L2 experiences across contexts are the most likely explanations for differences in L2 ability. This section discusses how the L2 experiences of learners in the immersion context can be implicated in the persistence of non-target L2 ability.

Participants of the two L2 groups were matched for L1, age of beginning English, age at testing, and parental education. Given their similarities, particularly for their L1 and age of beginning English education, the participants across these two L2 groups should have had cognitive perceptual mechanisms that operated similarly at the outset of learning L2-English. Young community-L2 learners are noted for being able to learn new linguistic cues. Consistent with this, the community-L2 participants studied here demonstrated much greater accuracy on the judgment task for articles, plural-singular marking, and past tense, despite not exactly matching the L1 controls. This indicates that the proposed initial attenuated learning described in the previous section is to a large extent eventually overcome for the community-L2 learners. Further, absent other factors, L1 entrenchment should not be expected to be permanent as both older and younger L2 learners demonstrate the ability to overcome it [@Macwhinney2017]. Thus, the default expectation for L2 learners, especially those who begin young, should be that their L2 abilities progressively converge with L1 speakers over time as their L2 exposure increases. However, evidence gathered for this dissertation indicates additional L2 exposure does not appear to be bringing immersion learners to a state of target language ability that parallels L1 speakers.

In Chapter Four, the out-of-school L2 environments of the two L2 groups were compared. This comparison showed that, while the immersion learners can receive similar amounts of out-of-school L2 input as community-L2 peers, the immersion learners use the L2 significantly less often to interact with others. As foreign language learners, the immersion participants' more limited proportion of L2 use for interaction should be an expected consequence of living in a community where the L2 is not widely used and is thus a reflection of their more limited access to target-language speakers. However, it is also important to emphasize that, of this more limited access to L2 interaction outside of school, the majority of it is likely still with classmates. In contrast, the community-L2 participants are certain to have more opportunities to use English with L1-English speakers and/or L2-English speakers whose L1 is not Mandarin. Thus, the key difference may not just be the amount of L2 interaction, but who the interlocutors are.

In a usage-based approach, learners inductively learn abstract linguistic knowledge from concrete experiences with language [@Bybee2006; @Lieven2016], meaning that the knowledge that is acquired is ultimately a reflection of the social contexts in which the learner has been exposed to the language [@Wulff2018; @Beckner2009]. As a result, learning an L2 from actual usage within an immersion context may be incompatible with attaining L2 morphosyntactic ability that parallels L1 speakers. Immersion L2 learners begin their programs in classrooms with one proficient speaker of the target L2 (*i.e.*, their teacher), and many additional potential interlocutors with roughly equivalent linguistic abilities both in terms of the L1 and L2 (*i.e.*, their classmates). Even for the presumably native or native-like input that immersion teachers provide, research has found that this input is shaped by the classroom context and provides limited opportunities for teachers to model the full range of L2 constructions. This can impact the distribution and frequency of constructions like verb forms with some forms being extremely infrequent in classrooms, if they are ever used at all [@Swain1988; @Peter2008]. In addition, the classroom context does not provide many opportunities with particular form-function mappings reflecting sociolinguistic distinctions [@Mougeon2010; @Harley1987; @Swain1990]. These factors will mean that the acquisition of some L2 constructions will be impacted by their low frequency of occurrence within the immersion context.

Nevertheless, the grammatical morphemes that were examined in the present study are all frequently used in English, and thus, should not be absent from the L2 input teachers provide for students. However, in contrast to teachers' presumably correct use of L2 grammatical morphemes, the same cannot be assumed for the L2 production of classmates. In the initial stages of an L2, learners are likely to model incorrect use of grammatical morphemes, as errors with these constructions are common regardless of a learner's L1 [@Goldschneider2005; @Dulay1974; @Larsen-Freeman1975; @Shin1999]. The potential impacts of L2 learners modelling non-target L2 use within classrooms has been previously noted, especially for contexts, like immersion, where L2 learners all share an L1 [@Lightbown1991; @Lightbown1992]. Thus, the immersion learners' low accuracy on the judgment task would suggest that a potential explanation for continued non-target L2 ability is simply the persistence of overheard incorrect L2 forms used by classmates. However, this is likely only part of the explanation as learners should not be expected to easily acquire non-target L2 construction that also contrast with the conventional usage of corresponding L1 constructions. For example, an L1-English-speaking learner in Spanish immersion would be unlikely to be mislead by a classmate's production of a count noun unmarked for number, interpreting it as evidence that Spanish nouns are optionally quantified. Given that both the L1 and L2 use obligatory number-marking on nouns, the unmarked interpretation, though consistent with the hypothetical classmate's non-target production, should initially be blocked by the form-function mapping of the L1 construction. However, this would not be the case for L1-Mandarin speakers in English immersion, where the default (but incorrect) expectation should be that number is optionally marked on L2 noun phrases as it is in Mandarin. Essentially, non-target use is unlikely to take hold when the produced L2 form does not easily map onto entrenched L1 knowledge.

In order to mitigate the impacts of L1 entrenchment on L2 learning, @Macwhinney2017 lists social participation as a protective factor, noting that young L2 learners often have greater opportunities and pressure to integrate themselves with peer groups who speak the target language. In contrast, older learners tend to be less open to these types of experiences and thus end up isolated from opportunities to use the L2. Though immersion learners are young, their unique L2 learning situation simultaneously involves both participation and isolation. While immersion learners may have the opportunity to use the L2 within their peer groups, this type of participation with classmates is still isolated from communities where the L2 is used natively. Because classmates may similarly depend on their shared L1 for the production and comprehension of the L2, it should not be expected that this type of social participation will contribute to mitigation of L1 entrenchment. 

Specifically for plural-singular marking, the findings presented in Chapter Three show that the immersion learners did not comprehend plural '*-s*' as reliably as the L1-English control group. It was proposed that the immersion learners may use English number marking in a manner consistent with Mandarin, meaning that they rely on use of determiners or lexical quantifiers that precede the noun, and which are only used when pragmatically relevant. In effect, this would mean that the immersion learners' L2-English knowledge includes non-target optional number marking, and that the absence of the bound '*-s*' morpheme would be a less reliable cue to number. If Mandarin-influenced number marking is an accurate reflection of how the construction is used within the immersion learners' social contexts, a usage-based approach should expect that this is what will be acquired. As a result, social participation within an immersion context does not provide access to speakers whose target language use can mitigate the impacts of L1 entrenchment. Instead, for some L2 constructions, it should be expected that participation could have the opposite impact as interaction with classmates contributes to entrenching non-target L2 ability. Essentially, this difference in the dynamics of social participation reflects a key difference between the community-L2 and immersion contexts.

From a usage-based perspective, linguistic knowledge is an emergent result of development through language experience and domain-general cognitive mechanisms [@Beckner2009; @Ellis2008NC], and thus, L2 acquisition in an immersion context needs to be understood as a product of these elements. For these approaches, there is no a priori innate representation to be completely or incompletely acquired, and thus, there is no final L2 competence that exists beyond what is the result of inductive learning in context. However, this also means that any prescriptive L2 standard that is removed from the actual experience of the L2 learners is also irrelevant (though such a standard may have an impact through pedagogical instructional interventions, as discussed below).

## Teaching Morphosyntax to Immersion Learners

<!-- You've talked about how this situation arose, how it maintains. Now this section can be about how it could potentially be changed - I could flag this in the general discussion intro -->

The modern immersion approach to L2 education has expanded to cover a wide range of L1 and L2 pairings around the world [@Fortune2008tedick]. This expansion is a testament to immersion's effectiveness in establishing strong L2 communicative abilities, while also providing content education for students. This success has provided a strong validation of communicative language teaching in general. Nevertheless, along with demonstrating its strengths, immersion also demonstrates the limitations of communicative language teaching, as gaps remain in accuracy with L2 forms despite the communicative ability that learners develop [@Lyster2008]. On balance, however, few would argue that the continued non-target ability for some L2 constructions seriously diminishes the value of the immersion approach. 

Despite immersion learners' communicative proficiency, pedagogical researchers have also sought methods to address immersion learners' non-target L2 abilities. A key method for addressing this issue is form-focused instruction (FFI). The purpose of FFI is to draw learner attention, either explicitly or implicitly to specific properties of the L2 [@Spada1997]. To someone outside of L2 research, the benefit of 'teaching' the forms of a language may seem uncontroversial. However, the success of immersion and other forms of communicative language teaching gave increasing support to the theoretical and pedagogical position that teaching L2 forms was neither necessary nor effective, and potentially even detrimental [see @Spada1997 for a discussion]. Nevertheless, meta-analysis of this type of instruction has established that FFI can have a beneficial impact for L2 learners in general, and potentially to a considerable extent [@Norris2000ortega; @Spada2010tomita]. Specifically for immersion learners, it is considered best pedagogical practice to include at least some FFI integrated within content instruction [@Lyster2007l; @Genesee2006]. However, the benefits of FFI in immersion are not entirely clear cut as research does not consistently find an impact.

In support of FFI, published quasi-experimental research in Canadian French immersion contexts indicates this type of instruction can generally be interpreted as having a positive impact on immersion learners' L2 abilities. French immersion studies of the impact of FFI on second-person pronouns [@Lyster1994], verbs of motion [@Wright1996], or grammatical gender [@Harley1998ff; @Lyster2004] have found this type of instruction to have lasting benefits. However, in none of these studies was non-target L2 use eliminated indicating that, despite improvements in accuracy, FFI cannot be relied on to bring about complete convergence on target-like L2 use of problematic L2 constructions. For example, the most effective FFI treatment employed in @Lyster2004 brought the fifth-grade student participants' oral use of grammatical gender on a picture-description task from an approximate 57% pre-test accuracy, to around 80% accuracy on both the immediate and delayed post-tests. Despite the large improvement, participants' grammatical gender remained inaccurate in 20% of instances.

In addition to these findings, in some cases, FFI has no impact on oral L2 skills [*e.g.*, @Day1991; @Warden1997] or improvements at immediate post-test disappear at delayed post-test [*e.g.*, @Harley1987]. An instructional intervention could potentially fail to have an impact for the straightforward reason that its design was flawed. However, interpreting these equivocal findings for FFI in immersion through usage-based theory illustrates why in some cases this type of instruction may have limited effectiveness. Ultimately, the key issue may not be the specific content of an instructional intervention, but its timing. 

FFI has been classified as either proactive or reactive. Proactive FFI includes pre-planned instructional interventions, whereas reactive FFI includes prompts and recasts of L2 forms used during interaction [@Lyster2007l]. However, a survey of FFI studies indicates that in practice both types are generally reactive in the sense that teachers or researchers identify non-target usage in a specific group of immersion learners, *and then* plan FFI to address identified issues. This means that the intervention is designed for learners who already have non-target use. The participants of an FFI study may have many years of L2 experience in the immersion classroom, and while an instructional intervention can *add* to this experience, it cannot erase the years L2 experience learners already have. Thus, it is important to consider immersion learners' accumulated L2 experience in its entirety.

The findings of @Day1991 illustrate the importance of considering not just L1 experience, but also immersion learners' prior L2 experience when evaluating the impacts of FFI. The study examined an FFI intervention designed to increase seventh grade French immersion students' accuracy with French conditional verb forms, which immersion learners may use inaccurately into tenth grade, despite L1-French speaking first graders already demonstrating the ability to use them accurately [@Harley1984Swain]. In the Day and Shapson study, the intervention was designed to provide metalinguistic awareness, opportunities for natural use in context, and structured linguistic games that required use of the verb forms. Findings showed that the participants in the experimental group scored significantly higher than those in the control group on both a post-test and a delayed post-test, but there was only a significant impact for writing, and not for speaking. Essentially, the participants showed that they had learned the L2 forms but did not incorporate this knowledge into their oral L2 use. However, the participants in the Day and Shapson study may not lack L2 forms to express conditional meanings when speaking, as research with other French immersion learners has documented use of alternative constructions in place of conditional verb forms such as use of adverbs or other analytic means [@Harley1992]. If these immersion learners already have constructions for expressing conditional meanings, then the aim of the FFI intervention was not to supply absent knowledge, but instead to get learners to abandon non-target form-function mappings that may have been used successfully over many years. In this specific case, the FFI intervention was essentially attempting to work against usage-based mechanisms of acquisition and as a result should be expected to have a lower chance of success. In this light, FFI that is implemented after non-target usage is already observed is an attempt to re-organize L2 experience in which non-target L2 constructions have been used effectively in context through a few hours of L2 experience spread over several weeks.

Therefore, the question of how FFI can benefit immersion learners does not have an entirely straightforward answer. Its potential benefit may depend on additional factors such as specific properties of the L2 construction involved [@Ellis2002rod], or, as suggested here, the benefit may depend on the timing of the intervention. With reference to the findings of the present dissertation, a usage-based approach should expect that FFI directed towards L2 ability with English grammatical morphemes will have little effect for these immersion participants. Specifically for English plural-singular marking, it is unlikely that the L1-Mandarin immersion learners lack metalinguistic knowledge of how plural '*-s*' functions in English, and therefore are unlikely to benefit from explicit teaching of the construction. However, even more importantly, if interaction with peers still involves extensive non-target use of plural-singular marking, it is unlikely that either proactive or reactive FFI will be able to counteract this authentic, but non-target use.

Though it is predicted here that FFI would have limited benefit for immersion participants' ability with plural-singular marking, or any other non-target construction that is frequently used within the immersion context, this may not be the case for immersion learners at different stages of development. As demonstrated in studies such as @Sagarra2013ellis, early training in an L2 impacts how subsequent L2 input is perceived, which in turn should impact subsequent L2 acquisition. Thus, for FFI to be maximally effective, it is best employed in a truly proactive sense, before non-target L2 forms become commonly used. For many L2 constructions, this may mean that FFI should begin immediately upon program beginning. 

An example of the potential effectiveness of early FFI in immersion comes from research by Peter and colleagues with a Cherokee immersion program [@Peter2006; @Peter2008; @Peter2011]. This research reports on a cycle of assessment of learners' L2 abilities which is used to inform instruction and curriculum design. This process begins at program onset in the preschool and kindergarten stages. Through this approach, potential issues in L2 development are identified and realistic grade-level expectations are set. The results of this process are that each cohort of new students has demonstrated closer convergence on L2 attainment expectations [@Peter2011]. Though this process has benefited multiple areas of L2 ability, it has been especially important for improving use of Cherokee morphosyntax. Cherokee has a complex morphological marking system that has been challenging for students to acquire through immersion [@Peter2008]. However, early FFI specifically addressing verb forms has led to greater overall proficiency and accuracy on learners' ability with these constructions [@Peter2011]. <!-- There's a missing take away sentence here -->

As stated in the introductory chapter, the motivation for this dissertation is not directly about improving immersion pedagogy, but rather to contribute to basic L2 research. Nevertheless, @Vanpatten2020williams list the limited effectiveness of L2 instruction as a key observation for which a sufficient theory of L2 acquisition must account. In accord with usage-based approaches, explanations provided here propose that the effectiveness of L2 instruction is impacted by prior learning of non-target L2 ability. Though it may initially be L1 learning that blocks or overshadows learning of L2 constructions at early stages, eventually accumulated L2 learning will be what directly impacts subsequent L2 learning.

## Limitations

This dissertation set out to investigate how learning in an immersion context impacts L2 acquisition by studying L1-Mandarin L2-English immersion learners. This topic is very broad and currently little research exists that closely analyzes the L2 abilities that Mandarin-speaking immersion learners develop. Thus, the studies employed here are all somewhat preliminary, and come with numerous limitations to be addressed in future research. Of these limitations, four key limitations are addressed here.

The first two limitations relate to the conclusion that non-target L2 usage is likely to persist due to immersion learners' L2 use with each other. First, data pertaining to the immersion participants' interlocutors lacks granularity. While it is reasonable to assume that when immersion learners are using English to interact with peers that they are interacting with other immersion classmates, this was not specifically probed. Second, no L2 production data was gathered. Specifically for English plural-singular marking, it was proposed based on comprehension data that the immersion participants continue to use number marking in a manner consistent with Mandarin pragmatics. While this is supported by the comprehension data, observation of immersion learners' interaction with each other would provide clarity about how English is used in this context. These issues can both be addressed in a future study that specifically asks about whether peers interact with English speakers who are not classmates and observes a dyadic interaction task designed to elicit number-marking constructions. While previous research has observed naturalistic L2 learners of English dropping the redundant plural '*-s*' morpheme when the plural noun is already modified by a preceding quantifier [@Pica1983], and even community-L2 L1-Mandarin adolescents will mark plural '*-s*' variably [@Jia2003], direct observation of immersion learners using variable plural marking with each other would strengthen conclusion made here.

A third limitation is that there are important differences in how L2 ability was assessed across the domains of morphosyntax and vocabulary. It was concluded that with more English exposure over time, the immersion learners' L2 receptive vocabulary knowledge would continue to increase. Thus, it may appear that L2 receptive vocabulary ability is less impacted by context. However, this does not mean that there are not important differences in the L2 vocabulary knowledge of the immersion learners. For example, @Harley1993 discusses the highly frequent French verbs [avoir]{.smallcaps} (*have*) and [tre]{.smallcaps} (*be*) and how learners in French immersion may continue to use these verbs consistently with their L1 English (*e.g.*, saying the French equivalent of '*I am hungry*' when '*I have hunger*' is the conventional way to express this in French). The PPVT does not probe this type of information, and it is entirely possible that the immersion participants' vocabulary knowledge would show differences with community-L2 and L1 speaking peers if examined in this way.

Finally, it should also be acknowledged that conclusions about plateaued L2 development would be strengthened by data collection at, minimally, one additional time point. The analysis in Chapter Two indicates that participants who had a longer duration of L2 experience were not more accurate on the judgment task than those with less exposure, and this is consistent with longitudinal child-L2 research that shows development is rapid in the early stages and then begins to slow or plateau [@Jia2007; @Paradis2016a; @Blom2012]. Nevertheless, as the question specifically pertains to whether individual participants are continuing to develop, data collection at an additional time point, potentially a year later, would provide a more direct answer to this question. 

<!-- I expect that their ability converges on each other and this makes testing exactly how they interpret plural-singular marking important. I make the argument that they have plateaued, but this really means that they have arrived at a different standard. This cannot be assumed to apply to all features of morphosyntax. It would be interesting to testing their ability to produce a diverse range of relative clauses -->

## Future directions

Currently, little research exists that specifically addresses the L2-English ability that L1-Mandarin immersion learners develop, and as such, potential future research directions are numerous. However, this section focuses on investigating the possibility that acquisition of the bound plural '-s' morpheme may be required for target-like acquisition of other English morphosyntactic constructions. A central tenet of usage-based theory is that subsequent language learning is built upon prior language learning, and the findings of the present dissertation raise the possibility that there may be a directional relationship between noun number marking and subject-verb agreement. However, it may also be that sensitivity to plural '-s' should allow for better morphosyntactic learning in general. A brief description of why relationships such as these might be predicted follows.

In the present dissertation, results indicate that immersion learners with many years of L2 experience still do not interpret plural-singular marking consistently. This evidence suggests that these Mandarin-speakers are using nouns that are unmarked for number information, which is consistent with how they are used in their L1 [@Corbett2000; @Rullman2006]. Associative statistical learning is key to usage-based language acquisition. However, this type of learning is mediated by learned attention [@Ellis2020wulff], meaning that not all elements of the L2 input are attended to. As was shown in both the eye-tracking and picture decision tasks of Chapter Three, the immersion participants do not consistently attend to the obligatory number information. For inductive statistical learning of subject-verb agreement, it should be assumed that this information needs to be made available to associative learning mechanisms. From a usage-based standpoint, an inability to consistently interpret noun number should make inductively acquiring target-like ability for English subject-verb agreement impossible.

In L1-English development, children begin to produce plural '-s' before they mark subject-verb agreement forms [@Brown1973; @Devilliers1973] and when these grammatical morphemes are put in competition with each other, preschoolers perceive the presence of a word final '-s' as a stronger cue to number than an agreement form of copula [be]{.smallcaps} [@Davies2019]. Given the timing and strength of noun number marking, it is possible that L1 learners first need to acquire the ability to consistently interpret nouns as inherently numbered before they can correctly link subject-verb agreement forms in their input. If this is correct, then this means there is an ordered and causal relationship between acquisition of each. In L2 research, demonstrating a relationship between these two constructions would provide a clearer understanding of how properties of an L1, influence acquisition of an L2. For example, neither Mandarin speakers nor Swedish speakers have L1 transferable knowledge of subject-verb agreement. However, when learning subject-verb agreement in an L2 like Italian, Swedish speakers would be expected to have an advantage given their transferable knowledge of obligatorily numbered nouns.

In addition to this proposed direct relationship between these two English constructions, grammatical morphemes can also serve as important distributional cues that benefit creation of syntactic categories based on prototypes [@Redington1998]. For example, English words that take the bound '-s' morpheme but not '-ed' are typically count nouns and thus the morpheme can serve as a cue to noun-like syntactic constituents [@Maratsos1980]. As a result, plural marking can not only be interpreted semantically, but also used as a cue to the syntactic structure of a sentence. Thus, as a morphological cue, plural-singular marking may serve as an early entrenched and inherent part of the L1 learning child's nascent noun phrase prototype, and thus, may be more central to that prototype than other, later learned morphological cues. If plural marking serves as an important cue for L1 morphosyntactic learning, how soon (if ever) this cue becomes available to L2 learners should impact the efficiency of L2 morphosyntactic acquisition more generally. Two key observations about L2 acquisition that need to be explained by a theory of L2 acquisition are that the impact of L1 on L2 acquisition is not unconstrained, and, as in L1 acquisition, there are often predictable developmental sequences in L2 acquisition [@Vanpatten2020williams]. This line of research may ultimately show that these two issues are intertwined.

# Conclusions

The three studies presented in this dissertation aimed to examine how the immersion context impacts what is acquired of the L2. In each study, differences in receptive L2 abilities were found between the immersion learners and comparison groups. For a range of highly frequent English grammatical morphemes, the L1-Mandarin immersion learners were different from both community-L2 learning peers, and from L1-English speakers. For English receptive vocabulary, immersion learners were different from community-L2 peers and fell below the age-standardized test norm for L1 speakers. When the out-of-school L2 environments were compared, the immersion and community-L2 groups were largely similar in their access to additional English input. However, they differed in the amount that they used the L2 to interact with others. In discussion, the differences between experiences in the two L2 learning contexts were linked to differences in morphosyntactic ability concluding that even a semantically transparent English grammatical morpheme can be susceptible to sustained non-target use in an immersion context due to lack of opportunities for interaction with others who do not share the immersion learners' L1. This dissertation provides evidence that the receptive L2 ability immersion learners acquire is distinct from that acquired by other high-proficiency early L2 learners and underscores the importance of L2 experience in impacting what is acquired of an L2. 

\newpage

# References

\begingroup
\setlength{\parindent}{-0.5in}
\setlength{\leftskip}{0.5in}

<div id="refs" custom-style="Bibliography"></div>
\endgroup
